---
tags: buy, home, sauna
source:
bookmarkOf: https://denoutdoors.com/collections/modern-amenities/products/outdoor-sauna
title: The Sauna
date: '2021-03-19T16:29:00+02:00'
headImage: "//cdn.shopify.com/s/files/1/0280/5429/0496/products/denoutdoorsdotcom_sauna16-1_f2cd6439-7107-45cf-817f-6ea9e11d57e3.jpg?v=1616453549"
uuid: 930971d0-2f7d-4390-9ce8-f1be77dab5dd
description: Download plans to build your dream modern A-frame bunk cabin, at an affordable
  price (PDF & CAD files). Includes blueprints, floor plans, material lists, designs,
  & more!
---

> Going the route of a tradition build using plans from Den has proven to be the simplest & most affordable approach, as well as the easiest to get permitted.
> 
> @stillwaterpond

> The final result is nothing less than stunning. The design is sleek, nestled into the back hillside in a way that is both formidable but also understated.
> 
> Julia Sherman, @saladforpresident

Buy the plans

In order to begin building your Den cabin in nature, you need to start with a set of plans. You can't unlock the rest of the process without them.

Get them approved

Take your plans to your local building department to ensure your build is compliant with all local regulations, and get your plans approved.

Plan your build

Need to find a contractor, or want to wrap your head around how you'll frame the wall of the cabin? Our detailed plans precisely inform all these conversations.

**Not ready for the Complete Package yet?**  
Go for the Starter and we’ll discount the amount of your original purchase if you upgrade later. [Email us how.](mailto:support@denoutdoors.com)

  
Includes

  
Starter Package

Most Popular  
Complete Package

License to Build

Lifetime Version Updates

PDF Plans (Printable)

CAD (Editable)

3D Model

Builder Bid Worksheets

Floorplans

Elevations

Foundation

Kitchen & Bathroom Details

Window & Door Schedule

Roof & Floor Framing

Structural Details

Mech., Electrical, Plumbing

Materials & Labor Worksheet

Fixtures

Equipment

**Use our complimentary build cost calculator below to determine the right size build for you**

Sign up for the Den Newsletter

Be the first to know about new cabins, guides, and promotions.