---
uuid: 219cdc1c-66cc-487f-bd9c-7d29859a29b3
bookmarkOf: https://finisterre.com/blogs/broadcast/soil-sand
category: article
headImage: http://cdn.shopify.com/s/files/1/1074/5128/articles/unnamed_fc935846-57af-404d-ba2c-fd6d14d02d68.jpg?v=1662048435
title: Soil & Sand
description: In February 2022, three friends set off for Northern Nicaragua to explore
  their passion for coffee, surfing, and travel. Soil & Sand is a record of their
  journey.
tags: []
date: 2022-09-01 19:04:21.762132706 +00:00
---

**RICH** - Do you want the stoked-out James Bowden version?

**JAMES** - (laughs) There was a journey with the waves just as there was with the coffee and the photography – it was a bit of an emotional rollercoaster! We’d all been to this particular surf spot before and had different experiences, with good waves and bad waves. I’d previously had a very positive experience, but when we got there, the guy we were staying with told us the sandbars were a little bit weird and he’s usually pretty optimistic! He said, ‘they’re a bit backwashy, but there’s sometimes a window of about half an hour when the waves are good.’ And we thought, ‘ah it can’t be that bad,’ but it turned out it was pretty bad.

**RICH** - Again though, that was a blessing, because we ended up cruising along the beach, sometimes finding alright waves, sometimes just cruising.

**NOAH** - It meant we went to loads of places we probably wouldn’t have gone to.

**JAMES** - For sure. It’s my fourth time to that particular area and I’d surfed a few waves around there, but generally, you get focussed in on the best spot. But this time, we started exploring the miles of coast around it and finding all these fun little waves which we could surf on our own.

**NOAH** - The last day was the best. We drove a few kilometres up the beach, didn’t see anyone and there was no one for kilometres to see. It was really fun. James was just out there for hours....

**JAMES** - It was kind of what you picture when you think about surfing in Nicaragua. Just a beach with no one around. Hotter than you can imagine, offshore most of the day, fun peaky beach breaks! It was an amazing way to end the trip.